---
title: "Optimal Formation of Autonomous Vehicles in Mixed Traffic Flow"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2020-IFAC
excerpt: ''
date: 2020-04-01
venue: '21st IFAC World Congress'
paperurl: ''
citation: 'Keqiang Li, <b>Jiawei Wang</b>, Yang Zheng. &quot;Optimal Formation of Autonomous Vehicles in Mixed Traffic Flow&quot;. <i>21st IFAC World Congress</i>, 2020.'
---
Abstract
---
Platooning of multiple autonomous vehicles has attracted significant attention in both academia and industry. Despite its great potential, platooning is not the only choice for the formation of autonomous vehicles in mixed traffic flow, where autonomous vehicles and human-driven vehicles (HDVs) coexist. In this paper, we investigate the optimal formation of autonomous vehicles that can achieve an optimal system-wide performance in mixed traffic flow. Specifically, we consider the optimal $\mathcal{H}_2$ performance of the entire traffic flow, reflecting the potential of autonomous vehicles in mitigating traffic perturbations. Then, we formulate the optimal formation problem as a set function optimization problem. Numerical results reveal two predominant optimal formations: uniform distribution and platoon formation, depending on traffic parameters. In addition, we show that 1) the prevailing platoon formation is not always the optimal choice; 2) platoon formation might be the worst choice when HDVs have a poor string stability behavior. These results suggest more opportunities for the formation of autonomous vehicles, beyond platooning, in mixed traffic flow.

[Download paper here](https://wangjw18.github.io/files/2020-IFAC.pdf)